---
title: 34c3
date: 2017-12-26
logo: ccc
lang: en
---

## Dude, you broke the future!

That was awesome!
Parallel: companies / AIs
Paper clip analogy, where an AI's goal is to maximize the number of paper clips
in the universe. To take this analogy further, all companies are paper clip AIs
of some kind: some maximize the number of cars sold, or batteries, etc.
There is also a point about regulation, which is basically not working because
untangled with the industry (e.g. net neutrality)

History is a powerful tool, because it can help identify cycles and identify
patterns.

AI singularity is a new religion (replaces/replays Christianism). If it looks
like a religion, it probably is a religion.

## Uncovering British spies' web of sockpuppet social

(Agents on social medias GCHQ)

Uncovers how a sub-section of GCHQ is targeting people or countries on social
networks (twitter in particular):
* Fake accounts
* List of fake proxies spread over social networks
* Fake websites
* Honey pots in the form of fake URLs shorteners, shared on social medias
(tweets only from 9am to 5pm from Monday to Friday, oups)

## Gamified Control? China's Social Credit Systems

"Do we have a techie guy here?" (at the CCC)

*This needs to be fact-checked (from video)*:

The dangers of gamification. Sesami credits, score on how good a citizen
you are (tencent, riot, epic, alibaba are in charge). Measures how much
you follow the party lines (and monitors the social network). Your score
goes down if you share pictures of bad actions from governments, or goes
up if you buy some stuff for work (working shoes). System mandatory in
2020 (currently opt-in)! (=>> Black mirror, but the score is computed by
the gov). You can see the scores of your friends and see who is dragging
your own score down.

Fear to obey is replaced by positive re-inforcement through gamification.

*Now from the speaker*:

* Internet is strictly controled in China
  * great firewall, golden shield, great cannon, etc.
  * true name registration (you have to use your real name/number to register on
    any service online)
* A lot of users
* The digital payment is over-taking cash payment (mobile payment)
*

* 12% of Snapshat is owned by Tencent

## Science is broken

* p-hacking (playing with p-values until you get "significant" results)
* publication bias

Science is not self-correcting (at a reasonable time-scale), some fields do not
try to reproduce studies. Mostly positive/impressive results are published and
advertised.

Boring science is closer to the truth. Most studies have no results or negative
results. We should look at publications with a more critical point of view: it's
false.

## Algorithmic science evaluation and power structures

## Inside the Intel Management Engine

@_markel__
@h0t_max
@_Dmit

Has access to most components of the computer: keyboard inputs, BUSes, USB, etc.
It is not well documented. In intel:
* using MINIX
* independent x86 32 bits CPU
* has a built-in java machine

JTAG: debugging electronic mechanisms

ME has two kinds of unlock: Orange and Red. They need a key signed by Intel to
be unlocked. The Red level allows full debugging of CPU, enabled before the main
CPU starts.

Hacks have been found to allow complete access (RED level) of the processor.

## We Should Share our Secrets

By Daan Sprenkels

Distributed secret sharing (wallet keys, passwords, bitcoin keys, etc.).
Secure = no one can ever compromise your secret, we should not loose them

*Idea1* (not secure because you can recover part N knowing other parts in the
case of bitcoin): split secrets in chunks and persist/distribute them independently

*Idea2* (does not solve the losing secrets problem): generate random A and
B and compute C = m ^ A ^ B (where m is secret) You can get back m by A ^ C ^ B

*Idea3*: Shamir secret sharing (n, k) (n = number of shares, k = threshold of
shares needed to reconstruct the original secret). You generate a polynomial of
k random coefficients, and compute n points on this polynomial and distribute
the n shares. To reconstruct you use a system of equations using Lagrange
interpolation.

Problem: does take care of integrity. (if some evil actor gives back a false
"share", then we do not get back the original secret)

*Idea4*: Generate a random key, encrypt our secret with it, use Shamir on the key,
and share that and the encrypted secret.

Protect against side channel attacks:
* No branching (if, &&, ||, etc.)
* No secret-dependent lookups (cache channel attack: timing cpu cache vs memory
  is different)
* No time-variable operations (div, mult, etc.)

=> bitslicing, each bit of a byte goes in a separate register. Then you need to
implement addition, mult, etc. with bitwise operations (&, |, etc.). You get
parallelism for "free" because operations are 32 or 64 bits.

Code: https://github.com/dsprenkels/sss

## Deep learning blind spots

> How to fool "Artificial Intelligence"

Apple's Face ID tech can't tell two Chinese women apart (it's like a collision).
Google = 86% of German desktop search traffic (source: statistica), 1B gmail
users.

What is *adversarial learning*? You can make a model mis-classify by
manipulating its input or training data.

We don't really understand why there are blind spots yet. Maybe the linearity of
models can be exploited.

Fast Gradient Sign Method
Jacobian Saliency Map => find two pixels that we can perturbate with the most
impact.

How to:
- pick a problem
- find a pre-trained model or build your own
- optionally, fine-tune it
- use a library: cleverhans, DeepFool, deep-pwning
- test the adversarial samples on another network

You can also attack a black-box model, without knowing what model it is. You
need to know the training data. (Papernot et al. Black-box attachs 2016).

You can transfer the ability to fool a black box model to fool another
black box model. They demonstrated this for: deep neural networks,
linear regression, SVM, Decision Trees, kNN.

*Cleverhans* is able to wrap a Keras model and generate adversarial examples.
*Deep-pwning*, comes with tensor flow built-in models. (works for text or images
as well).

Problem of adversarial text examples: It's hard to keep the meaning of the text
while fooling a model. It's much easier with images.

Evolving AI Lab: Fooling => generate images that humans do not recognize, but a
model is convinced he found a class (with high confidence)

Examples (bad):
- spam filtering
- network intrusion
- self-driving cars
- data poisoning
- malware (google mail, malGAN)

Examples (good):
- fool surveillance
- stenography
- adware fooling
- poisoning your private data
- investigation of black box deployed models

Use GDPR as a way to get more information and share it.

Personal thoughts: is this the counter-part to AI being able to generate data
(text, videos, sounds, images) that can fool humans because they are no
distinguishable from legit data?

@kjam
blog.kjamistan.com

## Electromagnetic threats  for InfoSec: Ways to Chaos in Digital and Analogue Electronics

José!!!

EM induce voltage and intensity in devices. Can damage and influence
Goal: detect such effect and protect against it

Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC):
* Robust to certain level of noise in the env
* Limited emission of EM noise
* A world of trust and compliance

Information security EMC issues:
* Correlation between the processed data and he emitted noise
* Disturbance due to intentionally emitted signal
* World where deception is likely

Threats:
1. recover data based on the EM emissions of a device
2. loss of integrity or availability when subjected to EM

Effects obtained:
* Corrupt data of PS/2, unknown key code received, modified device id, inject
  keystrokes.
* Radio communication: modify packets emitted by a mobile station (devices
  receive corrupted data), stop the communication of other communication towers.
* CPU thermistor: disrupt temperature measured of a CPU using EM field.

Use-case:
* A malicious process could be monitoring the temperature of the CPU, and
  receive information from an external device through temperature variations.
* Analog microphone tempering, inject voice commands to a voice
  assistant running on the device using parasiting signal (can be done
  through the plug when the phone is charging or an anthena): open an app,
  send a message, etc.
* Tracking, eavesdropping, cost abuse, reputation/phishing, etc.

EM attacks are a real threats, and the required material is cheaper and cheaper.
The entry level is becoming very low.

## Everything you wanted to know about x86 microcode

> But might have been afraid to ask

> Security Analysis of x86 processor microcode

On AMD K10, microcode can be updated and is accepted by the processor if the
checksum is corrected.

Used for:
* Instruction decoding:
  * x86 is complex and we need some logic to decode the instructions (prefix
    instruction, delayed size decoding, variable length of instructions, etc.)
* Fix CPU bugs:
  * Pentioum 1994, floating point errors
  * Kaby Lake fixed with microcode update
  * Phenom 2008, TLB entries could not get cached reliably
  * Ryzen 2017
* Exception handling
* Power management
* Complex features (intel CGX)

Vector decoder contains microcode engine, it triggers a microcode program which
runs in the CPU and can generate a variable number of micro-ops and are
scheduled in the pipeline.

Microcode is stored in a ROM, + a RAM. You can set break-points in the
microcode, and the control flow is redirected to the RAM where extra logic is
executed.

When updated, the update is loaded in the RAM of the microcode, then breakpoints
are set to redirect to updated code. On reboot, the state is reset to the
original state.

Is it hackable?

(No crypto because if we look at the hexa, we see too many repeating patterns)

Reverse engineer the instruction set of the microcode. Unknown instruction set
analysis. Because there is no public documentation of microcode architecture or
instructions set.

In: x86 instruction, t0 state, microcode update (random)
Out: state t1 (sometime it crashed)

They found a binary string which did not crash the CPU and yielded a new state
as output. (after few weeks of brute-force)

They also tried to read the microcode from the hardware directly. Using some
microscope.

They were able to implement their own microcode program (counting the number of
x86 instructions executed by the CPU).

Remote microcode attack, control flow hijack remotely using ASM.js and
webassembly. Cryptographic microcode trojans, to introduce time side-channels.

They developed a higher level language to develop microcode programs. You can
jump back to ROM from the RAM microcode.

Exploit: read some memory and place it into a register, perform some arithmetic
on it. They detect the presence of a magic value from memory. The value is
written by a webassembly module. It also contains instructions shifted by one
byte (';; mov', etc.). The microcode can shift the instruction pointer of the
CPU by 1 byte to start reading the "hidden" instructions from webassembly
program.

Crypto backdoor: the microcode hijacked the elliptic curve algo to allow
reconstruct key material. With only microcode and no x86 code.

https://github.com/RUB-SysSec/Microcode

Wow. So basically you can hijack the CPU if you control the BIOS or the kernel.
Lenovo anyone? Or any brand, or phones (Android?)

## Financial Surveillance

@TomWills

World-check database: contains profiles of people to check if they are
terrorist, frauders, money launderer or check other informations about
you. It's used to detect hidden risks. (from Thomson Reuters, who bought
a company for 530 million dollars, the deal involved a database)

Collection: compile hundreds and thousand of "reputable" domains' lists.
(Examples of sources: Wikipedia, cyberclass.net conspiracy site, state-run
propaganda sites: chinadaily.com.cn, race-hate sites: brettbart, neonazi site:
stormfront, created by former KKK members)

+ 20k profiles added per month
+ 40k profiles updated per month

2,2 million entities contained.

6k customers in 170 countries
49 of the 50 top banks
9 out of 10 top global law firms
300+ gov. and intel. agencies

Founded in 1999
1 year access can cost up to 1M euros

BBC investigation started after HSBC closed a few accounts without apparent reasons.

Chris Vickery (scanning the internet for exposed/open pouchdb looking
for user/passwords). He found a copy of the world check database from
2014. He shared it on reddit privacy.

World-Check.json 4GB -> CSV flattened -> Postgres for further analysis
Categories: name, aliases, position, citizenship, country, date of
birth, companies, categories/sub-categories, links to other profiles,
reports (illegal activities, bribes, corruption, etc.), etc.

Category can be "Political individual", sub = PEP, politically exposed persons.

They found "normal people" on the list. 60 greenpeace members were listed, under
the category "crime".

"Speculative security" - book

There are other such lists in existence.


## Coming Soon: Machine checked mathematical proofs in everyday software and hardware development

Lot of time is spent correcting code, not writing code.

* Debugging
* Testing
* Auditing
* Commenting

Formal methods at the rescue!
A proof in cook is actually a (Turing complete) script which finds a proof for
us. (You have induction, rec, repetition, etc.). Most of the time it will keep
working even when the code you are proving changes.

Poofs can be re-used, shared via libraries, etc. You can compose proofs into
bigger proofs.

You can imagine proving the full stack: CPU (VHDL) -> compiler (language
semantics) -> application written in higher level language. You only need to
proof-read the specifications that are exposed to outside. The rest can be
trusted to work properly because it's proved. It basically replaces debugging,
unit tests and integration tests.

Coq has a built-in functional language called Gallina.
Coq has an extensible parser which allow to define a spec and a specific syntax
to write the spec.

Case studies:
1. Kami (hardware verification). Using bluespec high-level hardware language.
2. RISC-V Open Instruction Set: formal semantics of instruction set, components
   for assembling verified processors, tools for producing verified software.
3. Fiat Cryptography: Fast ECC. Correct by construction cryptography (crypto primitives
   x primes x hw arch targeted). Now used in BoringSSL in Chrome (proved
   implementation of elliptic curves)

Coq can be asked to automatically derive the code and its proof to implement
some crypto primitives. The generated code was also much faster than manually
written in GMP. They could also generate custom code for all known (used) primes
used for ECC. All proved correct.

deepspec.org
github.com/mit-plv
riscv.org
boringssl.googlesource.com/boringssl

## History and implications DRM

> From tractors to Web standards

DRM does not give users any benefit, it just restrict what you can do.
DRM: limited use of some resource
DRM: their rights vs. your rights.

Problems:
* education
* art
* accessibility (changing the way it's consumed, displayed, etc.)
* convenience
* sharing (experience)
* free speech
* repairing instead of replacing
* translations

Does it solve any problem? Nope.
DRM is everywhere, not only software. Tractors, radios, coffee machines, etc.
it restricts the way you can use something. (it basically become un-hackable,
because it's illegal).

For tractors from John Deers brand, you agree to not repair the tractors.
-> Farm Hack.

DRM is now a web standard (but you cannot implement it)

Cory Doctorow talk 2017 to know a list of all places you find DRMs: autonomous
drones, hotel door, medical implants (e.g.: pacemaker), vehicles, etc.

Possible solution: Make things. (rem: but then it does not force existing
companies to behave better, you need to cut yourself from what they have to
offer.)

## Net Neutrality Enforcement in the EU

NN protects the physical infra of the internet. Keeps us in control about
services we want to use. Interferences can be physical slow downs, or economic
with more expensive services.

Internet is a bi-directional network, contrary to TV.
Removing NN is akin to removing the open internet from society

India had a big push back against facebook.
EU has a common legal basis for all countries.

In EU law requires a contract to specify min/max speed for a connection.

Most people working as regulators have a past in the industry.

How do we enforce NN in EU?
Updated their website about NN and how to submit a violation = 17%
Dedicated complaint mechanism => 3% (only France)
Offer their users speeds tests => 53%
Measure the internet in their country => 17%
Established penalties for infringing NN => 86%

Highest penalty for NN in EU? 3 million | 10% of annual turnover
Lower = 250 euros

Blocking/Throttling => regulators really slow to act
Paid prioritazation => Ok
Specialized services => not really seen much yet
Device freedom => Ok
min/max/avg => Big problem that we still have
Zero rating => biggest problem (some apps are not counted in the data plan:
e.g. spotify would not count). Impacts 86% of the countries. Only 11 have had
formal investigations into the situation. Out of the 11, 0 case has been
condemned.

India is doing very well and has good laws to enforce NN.

ISPs should not look into upper levels of the network stack (http, etc.). If
they start doing so, URLs become part of your bill (like telephon bills).

epicenter.works


## Cybercoins, cryptokitties, etc.

By the creator of Zcash (bitcoin + encryption). He created the first
crypto-currency as well.

Is this tech and market real or just hype?
Is it going to be used for good or ill?

* Bitcoin (2008) -> proof of work, mining, ledgers. Electronic digital cash,
  ledgers keep track of how many bitcoins people own. (worldwide ledger)
* Ethereum (2013) -> Worldwide computer. A time sharing machine. All node run
  the programs of the users and agree on the result. This does not scale up
  because you have one program running at any point of time.
* Blockchain (2014) -> Take the component from bitcoin and call it blockchain.
  It's from the industry, in reaction to bitcoin.
* Cryptography (1970's) digital signatures and secure hash function are the two
  concepts from cryptography used by bitcoin.
* Lighting Network (2015) -> tries to address scaling limitations of bitcoin.

Zcash uses zero knowledge proofs.

What have people used it so far:
* Speculation
* ICOs (5bn in 2017)
* retail (1bn/year), buying games on Steam - now dead because of scaling
  problem. It's too expensive to make a transaction (10 -> 40 dollars).
* CryptoKitties (20M so far)
* "dark markets" (drugs), 100M/year (out of 700 bn/year offline)

Current problems:
* scale
* safety
* applications

A lot of kinds of coins, some:
* Bitcoin: 300bn
* Ethereum: 100bn
* Bitcoin-cash (2017): 50bn
* Monero (2012): 6-8bn
* Zcash (2014): 1-10bn

Flo:
* Says generalities
* Trashes other crypto-currencies
* Zcash placement (his own currency)

The guy is a guru but it's not clear how good he is.

## Protecting your Privacy at the border

> Traveling with Digital Devices in the Golden Age of Surveillance

Why is it important?
* aspects of your life
* conversations
* bank records
* navigation history
* family photos
* etc.

This goes beyond privacy:
* Attorney-client privilege
* Doctor-patient privilege
* Reporter's privilege

Border is not above human rights law and policy.
Airport: first line check, then sometimes second check:
* communication difficulties
* irregularities in documentation
* database mismatches and signals

National law defines what is allowed in terms of searches:
* check identity
* search for dangerous objects or criminal evidence

In some countries you are not protected: Russia, China, Turkey, middle East,
etc. you need to take maximum precautions.

USA:
* may ask to unlock device, provide password, disclose social media handles.
* US Citizen cannot be refused to enter the country
* US Permanent resident: can raise questions
* Others: can deny entry

* 4,764 in 2015 and 23,877 in 2016 out of 400 millions border crossed. (x5)

Constitution applies at the border, but "routine" searches do not require a
warrant or individualized suspicion.

Threat model, desire to make statement, travel history, law enforcement history,
tolerance for hassle & delay, citizenship, residence, immigration status.

Think about the sensitivity of the data you carry, and the risk of losing access
to this data.

Before you arrive:
* talk to employer to see if it's ok to carry devices
* Protect: backups, encryption, etc.
* Social media: logout, remove passwords, private browsing mode
* *don't bring you device at home*
* *use a temporary device*
* *delete data if possible*

At the border:
* plan ahead
* be polite and respectful
* do not lie to border agents
* do not physically interfere
* document everything you can: names, badge numbers, and agencies, receipt for
  seized property

Consent:
* try to avoid implicit "consent", ask if it is an order or a request.

After the border:
* Document what has happened
* Change any password agents might have accessed

Technological measures to take:
* Encryption: AES-XTS, protect data at rest
* Secure enclave? (iphone 5s and later)
  eff.org/dice
* Device encryption
* Do not forget your password
* Turn off fingerprint unlock
* Turn off your device when you cross the border
* Trusted boot
* Offloading content from device to the cloud

Border agents may have access to forensic tools to allow recovering deleted
files.

It might not be possible to do secure deletion of files on SSD.
Tools linux: BleachBit, scrub, wipe
Tools: spider oak, tresorit, jungle disk, keybase
Self-hosted: owncloud, nextcloud (*You need HTTPs enabled*)

## Decoding Contactless (Card) Payments

Simon Eumes from payworks

> An exploration of NFC Transactions and Explanation of How Apple Pay
> and Android Pay work

EMV protocol/transactions. We take what we already have and put NFC on it.
Who is involved:
* Credit card (issued by a bank)
* Merchant with a terminal (they have a bank account)
Payment Networks link both parties (visa, mastercard, etc.)

Steps:
1. Card presentation: terminal knows what kind of card it is, it
activates a "kernel" (payment workflow which is specified by the kind
of card: visa, mastercard, etc.). Terminal asks for information from
the card to initiate the transaction: number, date of end of validity,
signature generated by the card, cryptogram (hash to insure that the
transaction is a new one, not a replay).
2. Terminal checks if the card should be accepted (geolocation), if the
card is allowed to pay in a shop, etc. Then card authentication (CA
and public key system). There is a private key on the card and they
determine if it was created by an entity owning the root CA. Check if the card
has the fonds needed for the transaction.
3. Terminal decides if the transaction should go on. Online authorization. Based
on card number's first digits. The payment system approves the transaction.

NFC transaction data involved:
* Account information (PAN, expiry date)
* Verification and processing data
* Authentication data (CA key, pub key of the card, signed dynamic data)
* Authorization data (amount, currency, date, time, cryptogram)
* Format card-terminal (ISO-7816, BER-TLV encoded payload)
* Format terminal-acquirer ISO-8583

NFC vs ICC: much faster transactions (lower than 1 sec)

How to make a smartphone emulate a card. Secure Element (SE), enclave for
cryptographic information. The card is a secure element (phones as well nowadays)

Trusted Service Manager: holds crypto keys to allow modifying the data inside of
the SE enclave (phone).
1. Provisioning of SE: enter your credit card number, trusted service manager is
asked to provision with this card. It asks the payment network to allow this.
They ask you (the user), to approve this action. If ok, the keys are provided
and embedded in the SE.

The smartphone adds a layer of authentication on top, with fingerprint or other
means to make sure that the cardholder is the person using the phone. (CVM:
CDCVM/ODCVM).

Account Data Tokenization: replace credit card number by a token. Tokens can
have a scope. Only a certain kind of transactions are allowed. Tokens can be
revoked individually.

Apple Pay: Secure Element + Account Data Tokenization
Android Pay: Host Card Emulation (no SE) + Account Data Tokenization

1. Send token and cryptogram to the credit card network
2. Token is sent to token manager to know what card it is
3. Then we know what kind of card it is and what bank issued it
4. Then normal process

What's next, you can provision tokens without an actual card (virtual card).
There are alternative payments systems: Alipay, WeChat. (QR code + app)

## OpenPower: the Current State of Commercial Openness in CPU Development

CPU dev flow:
1. HDL: specifying some hardware description
2. Netlist: generate logic circuits
3. Schematic
4. Layout
5. Integrated Chip
(high level chip design, system component design, HDL chip implementation,
firmware design, service code design, logic verification team, hardware
fabrication, systems test, manufacturing)

Going through the fabrication again can take up to 2 months.

* 500 pers to design
* 4-5 years
* 150M euros

System dev / z-operating system:
* 3000 persons

Every 2nd year a new system:
* 1200M euros

OpenPower:
* Moore's law is not true anymore
* Workload demands goes up
* Multiple IT consumption models
* Mature Open software ecosystems

OpenPower created by:
* nvidia
* google
* ibm
* mellanox technologies
* TYAN

1. IBM invested 1bn into linux on power8 (2013)
2. IBM launched open source model for hardware (2013)
3. IBM and Google released 420k lines of firmware code

Goal:
* Open the architecture to give more choice to the industry
* Simplify design with  alternative architectures

## The Internet in Cuba: A Story of Community Resilience

* telepunto, accessible hotspot around the country (you need to buy a card)
* nauta service to get access as a residence (you get a long-term user id +
  password)
* ~500 hotspots around the country
* Price: 1 CUC/hour (= 1 euro), that's very expensive (more than what you would
  put on an airplane flight)
* Phone, 1 CUC/MB of emails. You don't really get access to the net

Unsanctioned alternatives:
* El Paquete (1 -> 5 CUC, hard drive with a dump of data from the internet: tv
  shows, movies, etc.).
  paquetedecuba.com (to see what is in the paquete next week)
* WiFi sharing: Connectify, sharing a hotspot connection among several
  people for a cheaper price. The nauta login page was not HTTPs up to
  recently, but it's not fully rolled out yet. So you can easily get
  phished.
* Isolated Networks

You can get better access at university. Universities have a quota system for
students to split the load over a lot of users. People try to strategies their
access, they go in different places depending on if they need a big bandwidth
over a short period of time, or low bandwidth for longer.

There is a inter-university network (Red Universitaria). You can communicate
intra-country with higher bandwidth, with no contact with the public internet.

Gamers started to do lan parties, and wanted something more permanent. They
started to connect all kind of small network into a bigger, massive network.
100 000 users in Havana now. This is disconnected from the internet (it's an
internet on its own): SNET (Street Network)
It's using WiFi and cables (no optic fiber).

SNET:
* Local Nodes (up to 200 nearby users, ethernet wired)
* Regional Pillars (someone is responsible for a neighborhoud), each pillar is
  connected to other pillars (= backbone).
* Hardware: revolico, amazon (Ubiquiti Nanostation ~80 in the US, found for 170
  in Cuba)
* They have HTTP servers to distribute content, a partial name system (DNS AXFR)
* SCOPE Directorio de SNET (services listing curated by users)
* Gaming is one of the most popular usage, forums, real time chats, internet
  mirrors, dating apps, etc. (Wow, Starcraft, sims, WURM, TERA Ascending, etc.)
* Pillars can have home pages (e.g.: Habana.net), with info about the
  neighborhoud (~local news)
* They have Wikipedia mirrors
* Sub-community: netlab focused on open source. Centered around a forum. Run
  their own gitlab instance, they have a search engine on SNET, built by them,
  etc. (Carols, google fonts, diaspora, etc.)
* They have rules you need to abid to, in accordance to the rules of the country
  (security, etc.), some rules make sure that the SNET survive long term
  (bridging to the internet is forbidden). You have peak gaming times during
  which file transfer is forbidden etc.
* WifiNet Forums: 56k users, women: 30%, active: 500 (simultaneous)

Pain points:
* Cost for new equipment
* Identity: no Internal email or centralized identity
* Software is out-dated (many instances of software 8 years out-dated)
* Interpersonal conflicts which cause some communities to not be connected to
  others because admins don't go along very well.
* Uncertain future (the network is not regulated)

Take aways:
* Cuba is networking
* SNET might be the largest isolated community in the world
* SNET has some unique problems, and some original solutions

Collaboration with people on the internet through IRC is interesting. They would
post once in a while (from Cuba to Internet) lists of problems they are facing,
then disconnect. The community would then gather documentation and solutions on
how to solve the problems for the next time the Cuba guys would connect to the
internet.

Paper in Internet Measurement Conf, November 2017 in London.

@__KOPEK__ @willscott
